README.md, before:


# Vuls: VULnerability Scanner

[![Slack](https://img.shields.io/badge/slack-join-blue.svg)](http://goo.gl/forms/xm5KFo35tu)

Vulnerability scanner for Linux, agentless, written in golang.

[README in Japanese](https://github.com/future-architect/vuls/blob/master/README.ja.md)
We have a slack team. [Join slack team](http://goo.gl/forms/xm5KFo35tu)

[![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/3y9zrf950agiko7klg8abvyck.png)](https://asciinema.org/a/3y9zrf950agiko7klg8abvyck)

![Vuls-slack](img/vuls-slack-en.png)



----

# Abstract

For a system administrator, having to perform security vulnerability analysis and software update on a daily basis can be a burden.
To avoid downtime in production environment, it is common for system administrator to choose not to use the automatic update option provided by package manager and to perform update manually.
This leads to the following problems.
- System administrator will have to constantly watch out for any new vulnerabilities in NVD(National Vulnerability Database) and etc.
- It might be impossible for the system administrator to monitor all the software if there are a large number of software installed in server.
- It is expensive to perform anaylsis to determine the servers affected by new vulnerabilities. The possibility of overlooking a server or two during analysis is there.


Vuls is a tool created to solve the problems listed above. It has the following characteristics.
- Informs users of the vulnerabilities that are related to the system.
- Informs users of the servers that are affected.
- Vulnerability detection is done automatically to prevent any oversight.
- Report is generated on regular basis using CRON etc. to manage vulnerability.

![Vuls-Motivation](img/vuls-motivation.png)

----

# Main Features

- Scan for any vulnerabilities in Linux Server
    - Supports Ubuntu, Debian, CentOS, Amazon Linux, RHEL
    - Cloud, on-premise, Docker
- Scan middleware that are not included in OS package management
    - Scan middleware, programming language libraries and framework for vulnerability
    - Support software registered in CPE
- Agentless architecture
    - User is required to only setup one machine that is connected to other target servers via SSH
- Auto generation of configuration file template
    - Auto detection of servers set using CIDR, generate configuration file template
- Email and Slack notification is possible (supports Japanese language) 
- Scan result is viewable on accessory software, TUI Viewer terminal.

----

# What Vuls Doesn't Do

- Vuls doesn't update the vulnerable packages.

----

# Hello Vuls 

This tutorial will let you scan the vulnerabilities on the localhost with vuls.   
This can be done in the following steps.  

1. Launch Amazon Linux
1. Enable to ssh from localhost
1. Install requirements
1. Deploy go-cve-dictionary
1. Deploy Vuls
1. Configuration
1. Check config.toml and settings on the server before scanning
1. Scan
1. TUI(Terminal-Based User Interface)

## Step1. Launch Amazon Linux

- We are using the old AMI (amzn-ami-hvm-2015.09.1.x86_64-gp2 - ami-383c1956) for this example
- Instance size: t2.medium
    - For the first time, t2.medium and above is required for the data fetch from NVD
    - You can switch to t2.nano after the initial data fetch.
- Add the following to the cloud-init, to avoid auto-update at the first launch.

    - [Q: How do I disable the automatic installation of critical and important security updates on initial launch?](https://aws.amazon.com/amazon-linux-ami/faqs/?nc1=h_ls)
    ```
    #cloud-config
    repo_upgrade: none
    ```

## Step2. SSH setting

This is required to ssh to itself.

Create a keypair then append public key to authorized_keys
```bash
$ ssh-keygen -t rsa
$ cat ~/.ssh/id_dsa.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
```

## Step3. Install requirements

Vuls requires the following packages.

- sqlite
- git
- gcc
- go v1.6
    - https://golang.org/doc/install

```bash
$ ssh ec2-user@52.100.100.100  -i ~/.ssh/private.pem
$ sudo yum -y install sqlite git gcc
$ wget https://storage.googleapis.com/golang/go1.6.linux-amd64.tar.gz
$ sudo tar -C /usr/local -xzf go1.6.linux-amd64.tar.gz
$ mkdir $HOME/go
```
Add these lines into /etc/profile.d/goenv.sh

```bash
export GOROOT=/usr/local/go
export GOPATH=$HOME/go
export PATH=$PATH:$GOROOT/bin:$GOPATH/bin
```

Set the OS environment variable to current shell
```bash
$ source /etc/profile.d/goenv.sh
```

## Step4. Deploy go-cve-dictionary

go get

```bash
$ sudo mkdir /var/log/vuls
$ sudo chown ec2-user /var/log/vuls
$ sudo chmod 700 /var/log/vuls
$ go get github.com/kotakanbe/go-cve-dictionary
```

Start go-cve-dictionary as server mode.  
For the first time, go-cve-dictionary fetches vulnerability data from NVD.  
It takes about 10 minutes (on AWS).  

```bash
$ go-cve-dictionary server
... Fetching ...
$ ls -alh cve.sqlite3
-rw-r--r-- 1 ec2-user ec2-user 7.0M Mar 24 13:20 cve.sqlite3
```

Now we successfully collected vulnerbility data, then start as server mode again.
```bash
$ go-cve-dictionary server
[Mar 24 15:21:55]  INFO Opening DB. datafile: /home/ec2-user/cve.sqlite3
[Mar 24 15:21:55]  INFO Migrating DB
[Mar 24 15:21:56]  INFO Starting HTTP Sever...
[Mar 24 15:21:56]  INFO Listening on 127.0.0.1:1323
```

## Step5. Deploy vuls

Launch a new terminal, SSH to the ec2 instance.

go get
```
$ go get github.com/future-architect/vuls
```

## Step6. Config

Create a config file(TOML format).

```
$ cat config.toml
[servers]

[servers.172-31-4-82]
host         = "172.31.4.82"
port        = "22"
user        = "ec2-user"
keyPath     = "/home/ec2-user/.ssh/id_rsa"
```

## Step7. Setting up target servers for vuls  

```
$ vuls configtest
```

## Step8. Start Scanning

```
$ vuls scan
INFO[0000] Begin scannig (config: /home/ec2-user/config.toml)

... snip ...

172-31-4-82 (amazon 2015.09)
============================
CVE-2016-0494   10.0    Unspecified vulnerability in the Java SE and Java SE Embedded components in Oracle
                        Java SE 6u105, 7u91, and 8u66 and Java SE Embedded 8u65 allows remote attackers to
                        affect confidentiality, integrity, and availability via unknown vectors related to
                        2D.
... snip ...

CVE-2016-0494
-------------
Score           10.0 (High)
Vector          (AV:N/AC:L/Au:N/C:C/I:C/A:C)
Summary         Unspecified vulnerability in the Java SE and Java SE Embedded components in Oracle Java SE 6u105,
                7u91, and 8u66 and Java SE Embedded 8u65 allows remote attackers to affect confidentiality,
                integrity, and availability via unknown vectors related to 2D.
NVD             https://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/detail?vulnId=CVE-2016-0494
MITRE           https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2016-0494
CVE Details     http://www.cvedetails.com/cve/CVE-2016-0494
CVSS Claculator https://nvd.nist.gov/cvss/v2-calculator?name=CVE-2016-0494&vector=(AV:N/AC:L/Au:N/C:C/I:C/A:C)
RHEL-CVE        https://access.redhat.com/security/cve/CVE-2016-0494
ALAS-2016-643   https://alas.aws.amazon.com/ALAS-2016-643.html
Package/CPE     java-1.7.0-openjdk-1.7.0.91-2.6.2.2.63.amzn1 -> java-1.7.0-openjdk-1:1.7.0.95-2.6.4.0.65.amzn1

```

## Step9. TUI

Vuls has Terminal-Based User Interface to display the scan result.

```
$ vuls tui
```

![Vuls-TUI](img/hello-vuls-tui.png)


----

# Architecture

![Vuls-Architecture](img/vuls-architecture.png)

## go-cve-dictinary  
- Fetch vulnerbility information from NVD, JVN(Japanese), then insert into SQLite.

## Vuls
- Scan vulnerabilities on the servers and create a list of the CVE ID
- For more detailed information of the detected CVE, send HTTP request to go-cve-dictinary
- Send a report by Slack, Email
- System operator can view the latest report by terminal

----

# Use Cases

## Scan all servers

![Vuls-Usecase1](img/vuls-usecase-elb-rails-rds-all.png)

## Scan a single server

web/app server in the same configuration under the load balancer

![Vuls-Usecase2](img/vuls-usecase-elb-rails-rds-single.png)

----

# Support OS

| Distribution|            Release |
|:------------|-------------------:|
| Ubuntu      |          12, 14, 16|
| Debian      |                7, 8|
| RHEL        |          4, 5, 6, 7|
| CentOS      |             5, 6, 7|
| Amazon Linux|                All |

----


# Usage: Automatic Server Discovery

Discovery subcommand discovers active servers specifed in CIDR range, then print the template of config file(TOML format) to terminal.

```
$ vuls discover -help
discover:
        discover 192.168.0.0/24
```

## Exapmle

```
$ vuls discover 172.31.4.0/24
# Create config.toml using below and then ./vuls --config=/path/to/config.toml

[slack]
hookURL      = "https://hooks.slack.com/services/abc123/defghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz"
channel      = "#channel-name"
#channel      = "#{servername}"
iconEmoji    = ":ghost:"
authUser     = "username"
notifyUsers  = ["@username"]

[mail]
smtpAddr      = "smtp.gmail.com"
smtpPort      = 465
user          = "username"
password      = "password"
from          = "from@address.com"
to            = ["to@address.com"]
cc            = ["cc@address.com"]
subjectPrefix = "[vuls]"

[default]
#port        = "22"
#user        = "username"
#password    = "password"
#keyPath     = "/home/username/.ssh/id_rsa"
#keyPassword = "password"

[servers]

[servers.172-31-4-82]
host         = "172.31.4.82"
#port        = "22"
#user        = "root"
#password    = "password"
#keyPath     = "/home/username/.ssh/id_rsa"
#keyPassword = "password"
#cpeNames = [
#  "cpe:/a:rubyonrails:ruby_on_rails:4.2.1",
#]
```

You can customize your configuration using this template.

----

# Configuration

- Slack section
    ```
    [slack]
    hookURL      = "https://hooks.slack.com/services/abc123/defghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz"
    channel      = "#channel-name"
    #channel      = "#{servername}"
    iconEmoji    = ":ghost:"
    authUser     = "username"
    notifyUsers  = ["@username"]
    ```

    - hookURL : Incomming webhook's URL  
    - channel : channel name.  
    If you set #{servername} to channel, the report will be sent to #servername channel.  
    In the following example, the report will be sent to the #server1 and #server2.  
    Be sure to create these channels before scanning.
      ```
      [slack]
      channel      = "#{servername}"
      ...snip...

      [servers]

      [servers.server1]
      host         = "172.31.4.82"
      ...snip...

      [servers.server2]
      host         = "172.31.4.83"
      ...snip...
      ```

    - iconEmoji: emoji
    - authUser: username of the slack team
    - notifyUsers: a list of Slack usernames to send Slack notifications.
      If you set ["@foo", "@bar"] to notifyUsers, @foo @bar will be included in text.  
      So @foo, @bar can receive mobile push notifications on their smartphone.  

- Mail section
    ```
    [mail]
    smtpAddr      = "smtp.gmail.com"
    smtpPort      = 465
    user          = "username"
    password      = "password"
    from          = "from@address.com"
    to            = ["to@address.com"]
    cc            = ["cc@address.com"]
    subjectPrefix = "[vuls]"
    ```

- Defualt section
    ```
    [default]
    #port        = "22"
    #user        = "username"
    #password    = "password"
    #keyPath     = "/home/username/.ssh/id_rsa"
    #keyPassword = "password"
    ```
    Items of the defualt section will be used if not specified.

- servers section
    ```
    [servers]

    [servers.172-31-4-82]
    host         = "172.31.4.82"
    #port        = "22"
    #user        = "root"
    #password    = "password"
    #keyPath     = "/home/username/.ssh/id_rsa"
    #keyPassword = "password"
    #cpeNames = [
    #  "cpe:/a:rubyonrails:ruby_on_rails:4.2.1",
    #]
    ```
    You can overwrite the default value specified in default section.  
    Vuls supports multiple SSH authentication methods.  
    - SSH agent
    - SSH public key authentication (with password, empty password)
    - Password authentication

In order to scan, the following dependencies are required, so you need to install them manually or with tools such as Ansible.

| Distribution|            Release | Requirements |
|:------------|-------------------:|:-------------|
| Ubuntu      |          12, 14, 16| -            |
| Debian      |                7, 8| apptitude    |
| CentOS      |                   5| yum-plugin-security, yum-changelog |
| CentOS      |                6, 7| yum-plugin-security, yum-plugin-changelog |
| Amazon      |                All | -            |
| RHEL        |         4, 5, 6, 7 | -            |

## Check /etc/sudoers 

The configtest subcommand checks sudo settings on target servers whether Vuls is able to SUDO with nopassword via SSH. And if you run Vuls without -ssh-native-insecure option, requiretty must be defined in /etc/sudoers.
```
Defaults:vuls !requiretty
```
For details, see [-ssh-native-insecure option](#-ssh-native-insecure-option)

Example of /etc/sudoers on target servers

- CentOS
```
vuls ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:/usr/bin/yum --changelog --assumeno update *
Defaults:vuls env_keep="http_proxy https_proxy HTTP_PROXY HTTPS_PROXY"
```

- RHEL 5 
```
vuls ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:/usr/bin/yum --color=never repolist, /usr/bin/yum --color=never list-security --security, /usr/bin/yum --color=never check-update, /usr/bin/yum --color=never info-security
Defaults:vuls env_keep="http_proxy https_proxy HTTP_PROXY HTTPS_PROXY"
```
$ vuls prepare -help
prepare:
        prepare [-config=/path/to/config.toml] [-debug]

  -config string
        /path/to/toml (default "$PWD/config.toml")
  -debug
        debug mode
  -use-unattended-upgrades
        [Depricated] For Ubuntu, install unattended-upgrades
```

----

# Usage: Scan

```
$ vuls scan -help
scan:
        scan
                [-lang=en|ja]
                [-config=/path/to/config.toml]
                [-dbpath=/path/to/vuls.sqlite3]
                [--cve-dictionary-dbpath=/path/to/cve.sqlite3]
                [-cve-dictionary-url=http://127.0.0.1:1323]
                [-cvss-over=7]
                [-report-slack]
                [-report-mail]
                [-report-slack]
                [-http-proxy=http://192.168.0.1:8080]
                [-debug]
                [-debug-sql]
  -config string
        /path/to/toml (default "$PWD/config.toml")
  --cve-dictionary-dbpath string
        /path/to/sqlite3 (For get cve detail from cve.sqlite3)        
  -cve-dictionary-url string
        http://CVE.Dictionary (default "http://127.0.0.1:1323")
  -cvss-over float
        -cvss-over=6.5 means reporting CVSS Score 6.5 and over (default: 0 (means report all))
  -results-dir string
        /path/to/results (default "$PWD/results")
  -debug
        debug mode
  -debug-sql
        SQL debug mode
  -http-proxy string
        http://proxy-url:port (default: empty)
  -lang string
        [en|ja] (default "en")
  -report-json
        Write report to JSON files ($PWD/results/current)
  -report-mail
        Send report via Email
  -report-slack
        Send report via Slack
  -use-unattended-upgrades
        [Depricated] For Ubuntu. Scan by unattended-upgrades or not (use apt-get upgrade --dry-run by default)
  -use-yum-plugin-security
        [Depricated] For CentOS 5. Scan by yum-plugin-security or not (use yum check-update by default)

```

## example

### Scan all servers defined in config file
```
$ vuls scan --report-slack --report-mail --cvss-over=7
```
With this sample command, it will ..
- Scan all servers defined in config file
- Send scan results to slack and email
- Only Report CVEs that CVSS score is over 7
- Print scan result to terminal

### Scan specific servers
```
$ vuls scan -cve-dictionary-dbpath=$PWD/cve.sqlite3 server1 server2
```
With this sample command, it will ..
- Scan only 2 servers. (server1, server2)
- Print scan result to terminal



----

# Usage: Scan vulnerability of non-OS package

It is possible to detect vulnerabilities something you compiled by yourself, the language libraries and the frameworks that have been registered in the [CPE](https://nvd.nist.gov/cpe.cfm).

-  How to search CPE name by software name
    - [NVD: Search Common Platform Enumerations (CPE)](https://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/cpe/search)  
    **Check CPE Naming Format: 2.2**

- Configuration  
To detect the vulnerbility of Ruby on Rails v4.2.1, cpeNames needs to be set in the servers section.
    ```
    [servers]

    [servers.172-31-4-82]
    host         = "172.31.4.82"
    user        = "ec2-user"
    keyPath     = "/home/username/.ssh/id_rsa"
    cpeNames = [
      "cpe:/a:rubyonrails:ruby_on_rails:4.2.1",
    ]
    ```

# Usage: Update NVD Data.

```
$ go-cve-dictionary fetchnvd -h
fetchnvd:
        fetchnvd
                [-last2y]
                [-dbpath=/path/to/cve.sqlite3]
                [-debug]
                [-debug-sql]

  -dbpath string
        /path/to/sqlite3 (default "$PWD/cve.sqlite3")
  -debug
        debug mode
  -debug-sql
        SQL debug mode
  -last2y
        Refresh NVD data in the last two years.
```

- Fetch data of the entire period

```
$ go-cve-dictionary fetchnvd -entire
```

- Fetch data in the last 2 years

```
$ go-cve-dictionary fetchnvd -last2y
```

----

# Misc

- HTTP Proxy Support  
If your system is behind HTTP proxy, you have to specify --http-proxy option.

- How to Daemonize go-cve-dictionary  
Use Systemd, Upstart or supervisord, daemontools...

- How to update vulnerbility data automatically.  
Use job scheduler like Cron (with -last2y option).

- How to cross compile
    ```bash
    $ cd /path/to/your/local-git-reporsitory/vuls
    $ GOOS=linux GOARCH=amd64 go build -o vuls.amd64
    ```

- Logging  
Log wrote to under /var/log/vuls/

- Debug  
Run with --debug, --sql-debug option.

- Windows  
Use Microsoft Baseline Secuirty Analyzer. [MBSA](https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/security/cc184924.aspx)

----

# Data Source

- [NVD](https://nvd.nist.gov/)
- [JVN(Japanese)](http://jvndb.jvn.jp/apis/myjvn/)


# Authors

kotakanbe ([@kotakanbe](https://twitter.com/kotakanbe)) created vuls and [these fine people](https://github.com/future-architect/vuls/graphs/contributors) have contributed.

----

# Contribute

1. Fork it
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add some feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
5. Create new Pull Request

----

# Change Log

Please see [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/future-architect/vuls/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

----

# Licence

Please see [LICENSE](https://github.com/future-architect/vuls/blob/master/LICENSE).


[![Bitdeli Badge](https://d2weczhvl823v0.cloudfront.net/future-architect/vuls/trend.png)](https://bitdeli.com/free "Bitdeli Badge")

Commit message:

Support SUSE Enterprise Linux (#487)
* Support SUSE Enterprise Linux

* Implement Reboot Required detection on SLES

* Fix query OVAL because SUSE provides OVAL data each major.minor
version

* Update README

* Support SUSE Enterprise 11

Conflicts:
	Gopkg.lock
	README.ja.md
	README.md
	config/config.go
	models/cvecontents.go
	report/report.go
	scan/redhat.go
	scan/serverapi.go

README.md, after:


# Vuls: VULnerability Scanner

[![Slack](https://img.shields.io/badge/slack-join-blue.svg)](http://goo.gl/forms/xm5KFo35tu)

Vulnerability scanner for Linux, agentless, written in golang.

[README in Japanese](https://github.com/future-architect/vuls/blob/master/README.ja.md)
We have a slack team. [Join slack team](http://goo.gl/forms/xm5KFo35tu)

[![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/3y9zrf950agiko7klg8abvyck.png)](https://asciinema.org/a/3y9zrf950agiko7klg8abvyck)

![Vuls-slack](img/vuls-slack-en.png)



----

# Abstract

For a system administrator, having to perform security vulnerability analysis and software update on a daily basis can be a burden.
To avoid downtime in production environment, it is common for system administrator to choose not to use the automatic update option provided by package manager and to perform update manually.
This leads to the following problems.
- System administrator will have to constantly watch out for any new vulnerabilities in NVD(National Vulnerability Database) and etc.
- It might be impossible for the system administrator to monitor all the software if there are a large number of software installed in server.
- It is expensive to perform anaylsis to determine the servers affected by new vulnerabilities. The possibility of overlooking a server or two during analysis is there.


Vuls is a tool created to solve the problems listed above. It has the following characteristics.
- Informs users of the vulnerabilities that are related to the system.
- Informs users of the servers that are affected.
- Vulnerability detection is done automatically to prevent any oversight.
- Report is generated on regular basis using CRON etc. to manage vulnerability.

![Vuls-Motivation](img/vuls-motivation.png)

----

# Main Features

- Scan for any vulnerabilities in Linux Server
    - Supports Ubuntu, Debian, CentOS, Amazon Linux, RHEL
    - Cloud, on-premise, Docker
- Scan middleware that are not included in OS package management
    - Scan middleware, programming language libraries and framework for vulnerability
    - Support software registered in CPE
- Agentless architecture
    - User is required to only setup one machine that is connected to other target servers via SSH
- Auto generation of configuration file template
    - Auto detection of servers set using CIDR, generate configuration file template
- Email and Slack notification is possible (supports Japanese language) 
- Scan result is viewable on accessory software, TUI Viewer terminal.

----

# What Vuls Doesn't Do

- Vuls doesn't update the vulnerable packages.

----

# Hello Vuls 

This tutorial will let you scan the vulnerabilities on the localhost with vuls.   
This can be done in the following steps.  

1. Launch Amazon Linux
1. Enable to ssh from localhost
1. Install requirements
1. Deploy go-cve-dictionary
1. Deploy Vuls
1. Configuration
1. Check config.toml and settings on the server before scanning
1. Scan
1. TUI(Terminal-Based User Interface)

## Step1. Launch Amazon Linux

- We are using the old AMI (amzn-ami-hvm-2015.09.1.x86_64-gp2 - ami-383c1956) for this example
- Instance size: t2.medium
    - For the first time, t2.medium and above is required for the data fetch from NVD
    - You can switch to t2.nano after the initial data fetch.
- Add the following to the cloud-init, to avoid auto-update at the first launch.

    - [Q: How do I disable the automatic installation of critical and important security updates on initial launch?](https://aws.amazon.com/amazon-linux-ami/faqs/?nc1=h_ls)
    ```
    #cloud-config
    repo_upgrade: none
    ```

## Step2. SSH setting

This is required to ssh to itself.

Create a keypair then append public key to authorized_keys
```bash
$ ssh-keygen -t rsa
$ cat ~/.ssh/id_dsa.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
```

## Step3. Install requirements

Vuls requires the following packages.

- sqlite
- git
- gcc
- go v1.6
    - https://golang.org/doc/install

```bash
$ ssh ec2-user@52.100.100.100  -i ~/.ssh/private.pem
$ sudo yum -y install sqlite git gcc
$ wget https://storage.googleapis.com/golang/go1.6.linux-amd64.tar.gz
$ sudo tar -C /usr/local -xzf go1.6.linux-amd64.tar.gz
$ mkdir $HOME/go
```
Add these lines into /etc/profile.d/goenv.sh

```bash
export GOROOT=/usr/local/go
export GOPATH=$HOME/go
export PATH=$PATH:$GOROOT/bin:$GOPATH/bin
```

Set the OS environment variable to current shell
```bash
$ source /etc/profile.d/goenv.sh
```

## Step4. Deploy go-cve-dictionary

go get

```bash
$ sudo mkdir /var/log/vuls
$ sudo chown ec2-user /var/log/vuls
$ sudo chmod 700 /var/log/vuls
$ go get github.com/kotakanbe/go-cve-dictionary
```

Start go-cve-dictionary as server mode.  
For the first time, go-cve-dictionary fetches vulnerability data from NVD.  
It takes about 10 minutes (on AWS).  

```bash
$ go-cve-dictionary server
... Fetching ...
$ ls -alh cve.sqlite3
-rw-r--r-- 1 ec2-user ec2-user 7.0M Mar 24 13:20 cve.sqlite3
```

Now we successfully collected vulnerbility data, then start as server mode again.
```bash
$ go-cve-dictionary server
[Mar 24 15:21:55]  INFO Opening DB. datafile: /home/ec2-user/cve.sqlite3
[Mar 24 15:21:55]  INFO Migrating DB
[Mar 24 15:21:56]  INFO Starting HTTP Sever...
[Mar 24 15:21:56]  INFO Listening on 127.0.0.1:1323
```

## Step5. Deploy vuls

Launch a new terminal, SSH to the ec2 instance.

go get
```
$ go get github.com/future-architect/vuls
```

## Step6. Config

Create a config file(TOML format).

```
$ cat config.toml
[servers]

[servers.172-31-4-82]
host         = "172.31.4.82"
port        = "22"
user        = "ec2-user"
keyPath     = "/home/ec2-user/.ssh/id_rsa"
```

## Step7. Setting up target servers for vuls  

```
$ vuls configtest
```

## Step8. Start Scanning

```
$ vuls scan
INFO[0000] Begin scannig (config: /home/ec2-user/config.toml)

... snip ...

172-31-4-82 (amazon 2015.09)
============================
CVE-2016-0494   10.0    Unspecified vulnerability in the Java SE and Java SE Embedded components in Oracle
                        Java SE 6u105, 7u91, and 8u66 and Java SE Embedded 8u65 allows remote attackers to
                        affect confidentiality, integrity, and availability via unknown vectors related to
                        2D.
... snip ...

CVE-2016-0494
-------------
Score           10.0 (High)
Vector          (AV:N/AC:L/Au:N/C:C/I:C/A:C)
Summary         Unspecified vulnerability in the Java SE and Java SE Embedded components in Oracle Java SE 6u105,
                7u91, and 8u66 and Java SE Embedded 8u65 allows remote attackers to affect confidentiality,
                integrity, and availability via unknown vectors related to 2D.
NVD             https://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/detail?vulnId=CVE-2016-0494
MITRE           https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2016-0494
CVE Details     http://www.cvedetails.com/cve/CVE-2016-0494
CVSS Claculator https://nvd.nist.gov/cvss/v2-calculator?name=CVE-2016-0494&vector=(AV:N/AC:L/Au:N/C:C/I:C/A:C)
RHEL-CVE        https://access.redhat.com/security/cve/CVE-2016-0494
ALAS-2016-643   https://alas.aws.amazon.com/ALAS-2016-643.html
Package/CPE     java-1.7.0-openjdk-1.7.0.91-2.6.2.2.63.amzn1 -> java-1.7.0-openjdk-1:1.7.0.95-2.6.4.0.65.amzn1

```

## Step9. TUI

Vuls has Terminal-Based User Interface to display the scan result.

```
$ vuls tui
```

![Vuls-TUI](img/hello-vuls-tui.png)


----

# Architecture

![Vuls-Architecture](img/vuls-architecture.png)

## go-cve-dictinary  
- Fetch vulnerbility information from NVD, JVN(Japanese), then insert into SQLite.

## Vuls
- Scan vulnerabilities on the servers and create a list of the CVE ID
- For more detailed information of the detected CVE, send HTTP request to go-cve-dictinary
- Send a report by Slack, Email
- System operator can view the latest report by terminal

- On SUSE Enterprise Linux
Same as fast scan mode for now.

----

# Use Cases

## Scan all servers

![Vuls-Usecase1](img/vuls-usecase-elb-rails-rds-all.png)

## Scan a single server

web/app server in the same configuration under the load balancer

![Vuls-Usecase2](img/vuls-usecase-elb-rails-rds-single.png)

----

# Support OS

| Distribution|            Release |
|:------------|-------------------:|
| Ubuntu      |          12, 14, 16|
| Debian      |                7, 8|
| RHEL        |          4, 5, 6, 7|
| CentOS      |             5, 6, 7|
| Amazon Linux|                All |

----


# Usage: Automatic Server Discovery

Discovery subcommand discovers active servers specifed in CIDR range, then print the template of config file(TOML format) to terminal.

```
$ vuls discover -help
discover:
        discover 192.168.0.0/24
```

## Exapmle

```
$ vuls discover 172.31.4.0/24
# Create config.toml using below and then ./vuls --config=/path/to/config.toml

[slack]
hookURL      = "https://hooks.slack.com/services/abc123/defghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz"
channel      = "#channel-name"
#channel      = "#{servername}"
iconEmoji    = ":ghost:"
authUser     = "username"
notifyUsers  = ["@username"]

[mail]
smtpAddr      = "smtp.gmail.com"
smtpPort      = 465
user          = "username"
password      = "password"
from          = "from@address.com"
to            = ["to@address.com"]
cc            = ["cc@address.com"]
subjectPrefix = "[vuls]"

[default]
#port        = "22"
#user        = "username"
#password    = "password"
#keyPath     = "/home/username/.ssh/id_rsa"
#keyPassword = "password"

[servers]

[servers.172-31-4-82]
host         = "172.31.4.82"
#port        = "22"
#user        = "root"
#password    = "password"
#keyPath     = "/home/username/.ssh/id_rsa"
#keyPassword = "password"
#cpeNames = [
#  "cpe:/a:rubyonrails:ruby_on_rails:4.2.1",
#]
```

You can customize your configuration using this template.

----

# Configuration

- Slack section
    ```
    [slack]
    hookURL      = "https://hooks.slack.com/services/abc123/defghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz"
    channel      = "#channel-name"
    #channel      = "#{servername}"
    iconEmoji    = ":ghost:"
    authUser     = "username"
    notifyUsers  = ["@username"]
    ```

    - hookURL : Incomming webhook's URL  
    - channel : channel name.  
    If you set #{servername} to channel, the report will be sent to #servername channel.  
    In the following example, the report will be sent to the #server1 and #server2.  
    Be sure to create these channels before scanning.
      ```
      [slack]
      channel      = "#{servername}"
      ...snip...

      [servers]

      [servers.server1]
      host         = "172.31.4.82"
      ...snip...

      [servers.server2]
      host         = "172.31.4.83"
      ...snip...
      ```

    - iconEmoji: emoji
    - authUser: username of the slack team
    - notifyUsers: a list of Slack usernames to send Slack notifications.
      If you set ["@foo", "@bar"] to notifyUsers, @foo @bar will be included in text.  
      So @foo, @bar can receive mobile push notifications on their smartphone.  

- Mail section
    ```
    [mail]
    smtpAddr      = "smtp.gmail.com"
    smtpPort      = 465
    user          = "username"
    password      = "password"
    from          = "from@address.com"
    to            = ["to@address.com"]
    cc            = ["cc@address.com"]
    subjectPrefix = "[vuls]"
    ```

- Defualt section
    ```
    [default]
    #port        = "22"
    #user        = "username"
    #password    = "password"
    #keyPath     = "/home/username/.ssh/id_rsa"
    #keyPassword = "password"
    ```
    Items of the defualt section will be used if not specified.

- servers section
    ```
    [servers]

    [servers.172-31-4-82]
    host         = "172.31.4.82"
    #port        = "22"
    #user        = "root"
    #password    = "password"
    #keyPath     = "/home/username/.ssh/id_rsa"
    #keyPassword = "password"
    #cpeNames = [
    #  "cpe:/a:rubyonrails:ruby_on_rails:4.2.1",
    #]
    ```
    You can overwrite the default value specified in default section.  
    Vuls supports multiple SSH authentication methods.  
    - SSH agent
    - SSH public key authentication (with password, empty password)
    - Password authentication

In order to scan, the following dependencies are required, so you need to install them manually or with tools such as Ansible.

| Distribution|            Release | Requirements |
|:------------|-------------------:|:-------------|
| Ubuntu      |          12, 14, 16| -            |
| Debian      |                7, 8| apptitude    |
| CentOS      |                   5| yum-plugin-security, yum-changelog |
| CentOS      |                6, 7| yum-plugin-security, yum-plugin-changelog |
| Amazon      |                All | -            |
| RHEL        |         4, 5, 6, 7 | -            |

## Check /etc/sudoers 

The configtest subcommand checks sudo settings on target servers whether Vuls is able to SUDO with nopassword via SSH. And if you run Vuls without -ssh-native-insecure option, requiretty must be defined in /etc/sudoers.
```
Defaults:vuls !requiretty
```
For details, see [-ssh-native-insecure option](#-ssh-native-insecure-option)

Example of /etc/sudoers on target servers

- CentOS
```
vuls ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:/usr/bin/yum --changelog --assumeno update *
Defaults:vuls env_keep="http_proxy https_proxy HTTP_PROXY HTTPS_PROXY"
```

- RHEL 5 
```
vuls ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:/usr/bin/yum --color=never repolist, /usr/bin/yum --color=never list-security --security, /usr/bin/yum --color=never check-update, /usr/bin/yum --color=never info-security
Defaults:vuls env_keep="http_proxy https_proxy HTTP_PROXY HTTPS_PROXY"
```
$ vuls prepare -help
prepare:
        prepare [-config=/path/to/config.toml] [-debug]

  -config string
        /path/to/toml (default "$PWD/config.toml")
  -debug
        debug mode
  -use-unattended-upgrades
        [Depricated] For Ubuntu, install unattended-upgrades
```

----

# Usage: Scan

```
$ vuls scan -help
scan:
        scan
                [-lang=en|ja]
                [-config=/path/to/config.toml]
                [-dbpath=/path/to/vuls.sqlite3]
                [--cve-dictionary-dbpath=/path/to/cve.sqlite3]
                [-cve-dictionary-url=http://127.0.0.1:1323]
                [-cvss-over=7]
                [-report-slack]
                [-report-mail]
                [-report-slack]
                [-http-proxy=http://192.168.0.1:8080]
                [-debug]
                [-debug-sql]
  -config string
        /path/to/toml (default "$PWD/config.toml")
  --cve-dictionary-dbpath string
        /path/to/sqlite3 (For get cve detail from cve.sqlite3)        
  -cve-dictionary-url string
        http://CVE.Dictionary (default "http://127.0.0.1:1323")
  -cvss-over float
        -cvss-over=6.5 means reporting CVSS Score 6.5 and over (default: 0 (means report all))
  -results-dir string
        /path/to/results (default "$PWD/results")
  -debug
        debug mode
  -debug-sql
        SQL debug mode
  -http-proxy string
        http://proxy-url:port (default: empty)
  -lang string
        [en|ja] (default "en")
  -report-json
        Write report to JSON files ($PWD/results/current)
  -report-mail
        Send report via Email
  -report-slack
        Send report via Slack
  -use-unattended-upgrades
        [Depricated] For Ubuntu. Scan by unattended-upgrades or not (use apt-get upgrade --dry-run by default)
  -use-yum-plugin-security
        [Depricated] For CentOS 5. Scan by yum-plugin-security or not (use yum check-update by default)

```

## example

### Scan all servers defined in config file
```
$ vuls scan --report-slack --report-mail --cvss-over=7
```
With this sample command, it will ..
- Scan all servers defined in config file
- Send scan results to slack and email
- Only Report CVEs that CVSS score is over 7
- Print scan result to terminal

### Scan specific servers
```
$ vuls scan -cve-dictionary-dbpath=$PWD/cve.sqlite3 server1 server2
```
With this sample command, it will ..
- Scan only 2 servers. (server1, server2)
- Print scan result to terminal



----

# Usage: Scan vulnerability of non-OS package

It is possible to detect vulnerabilities something you compiled by yourself, the language libraries and the frameworks that have been registered in the [CPE](https://nvd.nist.gov/cpe.cfm).

-  How to search CPE name by software name
    - [NVD: Search Common Platform Enumerations (CPE)](https://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/cpe/search)  
    **Check CPE Naming Format: 2.2**

- Configuration  
To detect the vulnerbility of Ruby on Rails v4.2.1, cpeNames needs to be set in the servers section.
    ```
    [servers]

    [servers.172-31-4-82]
    host         = "172.31.4.82"
    user        = "ec2-user"
    keyPath     = "/home/username/.ssh/id_rsa"
    cpeNames = [
      "cpe:/a:rubyonrails:ruby_on_rails:4.2.1",
    ]
    ```

# Usage: Update NVD Data.

```
$ go-cve-dictionary fetchnvd -h
fetchnvd:
        fetchnvd
                [-last2y]
                [-dbpath=/path/to/cve.sqlite3]
                [-debug]
                [-debug-sql]

  -dbpath string
        /path/to/sqlite3 (default "$PWD/cve.sqlite3")
  -debug
        debug mode
  -debug-sql
        SQL debug mode
  -last2y
        Refresh NVD data in the last two years.
```

- Fetch data of the entire period

```
$ go-cve-dictionary fetchnvd -entire
```

- Fetch data in the last 2 years

```
$ go-cve-dictionary fetchnvd -last2y
```

----

# Misc

- HTTP Proxy Support  
If your system is behind HTTP proxy, you have to specify --http-proxy option.

- How to Daemonize go-cve-dictionary  
Use Systemd, Upstart or supervisord, daemontools...

- How to update vulnerbility data automatically.  
Use job scheduler like Cron (with -last2y option).

- How to cross compile
    ```bash
    $ cd /path/to/your/local-git-reporsitory/vuls
    $ GOOS=linux GOARCH=amd64 go build -o vuls.amd64
    ```

- Logging  
Log wrote to under /var/log/vuls/

- Debug  
Run with --debug, --sql-debug option.

- Windows  
Use Microsoft Baseline Secuirty Analyzer. [MBSA](https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/security/cc184924.aspx)

----

# Data Source

- [NVD](https://nvd.nist.gov/)
- [JVN(Japanese)](http://jvndb.jvn.jp/apis/myjvn/)


# Authors

kotakanbe ([@kotakanbe](https://twitter.com/kotakanbe)) created vuls and [these fine people](https://github.com/future-architect/vuls/graphs/contributors) have contributed.

----

# Contribute

1. Fork it
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add some feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
5. Create new Pull Request

----

# Change Log

Please see [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/future-architect/vuls/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

----

# Licence

Please see [LICENSE](https://github.com/future-architect/vuls/blob/master/LICENSE).


[![Bitdeli Badge](https://d2weczhvl823v0.cloudfront.net/future-architect/vuls/trend.png)](https://bitdeli.com/free "Bitdeli Badge")
